thirdparty/README.md, before:

# Third party libraries

Please keep categories (`##` level) listed alphabetically and matching their
respective folder names. Use two empty lines to separate categories for
readability.


## basis_universal

- Upstream: https://github.com/BinomialLLC/basis_universal
- Version: git (895ee8ee7e04f22267f8d16d46de04d5a01d63ac, 2020)
- License: Apache 2.0

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `.cpp` and `.h` files in root folder except for `basisu_tool.cpp` (contains `main` and can cause link error)
- `.cpp`, `.h` and `.inc` files in `transcoder/`, keeping folder structure
- `LICENSE`


## bullet

- Upstream: https://github.com/bulletphysics/bullet3
- Version: 3.08 (df09fd9ed37e365ceae884ca7f620b61607dae2e, 2020)
- License: zlib

Files extracted from upstream source:

- src/* apart from CMakeLists.txt and premake4.lua files
- LICENSE.txt


## certs

- Upstream: Mozilla, via https://apps.fedoraproject.org/packages/ca-certificates
- Version: 2018.2.26 (2018)
- License: MPL 2.0

File extracted from a recent Fedora install:
/etc/pki/ca-trust/extracted/pem/tls-ca-bundle.pem
(It can't be extracted directly from the package,
as it's generated on the user's system.)


## cvtt

- Upstream: https://github.com/elasota/cvtt
- Version: 1.0.0-beta4 (cc8472a04ba110fe999c686d07af40f7839051fd, 2018)
- License: MIT

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .cpp, .h, and .txt files in ConvectionKernels/


## doctest

- Upstream: https://github.com/onqtam/doctest
- Version: 2.4.4 (97d5a9447e66cd5e107b7a6c463be4a468a40496, 2020)
- License: MIT

Extracted from .zip provided. Extracted license and header only.


## enet

- Upstream: http://enet.bespin.org
- Version: 1.3.17 (e0e7045b7e056b454b5093cb34df49dc4cee0bee, 2020)
- License: MIT

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .c files in the main directory (except unix.c win32.c)
- the include/enet/ folder as enet/ (except unix.h win32.h)
- LICENSE file

Important: enet.h, host.c, protocol.c have been slightly modified
to be usable by Godot's socket implementation and allow IPv6 and DTLS.
Apply the patches in the `patches/` folder when syncing on newer upstream
commits.

Three files (godot.cpp, enet/godot.h, enet/godot_ext.h) have been added to provide
enet socket implementation using Godot classes.

It is still possible to build against a system wide ENet but doing so
will limit its functionality to IPv4 only.


## etc2comp

- Upstream: https://github.com/google/etc2comp
- Version: git (9cd0f9cae0f32338943699bb418107db61bb66f2, 2017)
- License: Apache 2.0

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .cpp and .h files in EtcLib/
- README.md, LICENSE, AUTHORS

Important: Some files have Godot-made changes.
They are marked with `// -- GODOT start --` and `// -- GODOT end --`
comments.


## fonts

- `NotoSans*.ttf`, `NotoNaskhArabicUI_Regular.ttf`:
  * Upstream: https://github.com/googlei18n/noto-fonts
  * Version: 1.06 (2017)
  * License: OFL-1.1
  * Comment: Use UI font variant if available, because it has tight vertical metrics and
    good for UI.
- `Hack_Regular.ttf`:
  * Upstream: https://github.com/source-foundry/Hack
  * Version: 3.003 (2018)
  * License: MIT + Bitstream Vera License
- `DroidSans*.ttf`:
  * Upstream: https://android.googlesource.com/platform/frameworks/base/+/master/data/fonts/
  * Version: ? (pre-2014 commit when DroidSansJapanese.ttf was obsoleted)
  * License: Apache 2.0
- `Tamsyn*.png`:
  * Upstream: http://www.fial.com/~scott/tamsyn-font/
  * Version: 1.11 (2015)
  * License: Tamsyn
  * Comment: Extracted "0..9,A..F" characters for hex code printing.


## freetype

- Upstream: https://www.freetype.org
- Version: 2.10.4 (6a2b3e4007e794bfc6c91030d0ed987f925164a8, 2020)
- License: FreeType License (BSD-like)

Files extracted from upstream source:

- the `src/` folder, stripped of the `Jamfile` files and the `tools` subfolder
- the `include/` folder
- `docs/{FTL.TXT,LICENSE.TXT}`


## glslang

- Upstream: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glslang
- Version: git (dd69df7f3dac26362e10b0f38efb9e47990f7537, 2020)
- License: glslang

Version should be kept in sync with the one of the used Vulkan SDK (see `vulkan`
section). Check Vulkan-ValidationLayers at the matching SDK tag for the known
good glslang commit: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-ValidationLayers/blob/master/scripts/known_good.json

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `glslang` (except `glslang/HLSL`), `OGLCompilersDLL`, `SPIRV`
- `StandAlone/{DirStackFileIncluder.h,ResourceLimits.{cpp,h}}`
- Run `cmake . && make` and copy generated `include/glslang/build_info.h`
  to `glslang/build_info.h`
- `LICENSE.txt`
- Unnecessary files like `CMakeLists.txt` and `updateGrammar` removed.


## graphite

- Upstream: https://github.com/silnrsi/graphite
- Version: 1.3.14 (92f59dcc52f73ce747f1cdc831579ed2546884aa, 2020)
- License: MPL-2.0

Files extracted from upstream source:

- the `include` folder
- the `src` folder
- `COPYING`, `ChangeLog`


## harfbuzz

- Upstream: https://github.com/harfbuzz/harfbuzz
- Version: 2.8.0 (03538e872a0610a65fad692b33d3646f387cf578, 2021)
- License: MIT

Files extracted from upstream source:

- the `src` folder
- `AUTHORS`, `COPYING`, `NEWS`, `THANKS`


## icu4c

- Upstream: https://github.com/unicode-org/icu
- Version: 68.2 (84e1f26ea77152936e70d53178a816dbfbf69989, 2020)
- License: Unicode

Files extracted from upstream source:

- the `common` folder
- `APIChangeReport.md`, `LICENSE`

Files generated from upstream source:

- the `icudt68l.dat` built with the provided `godot_data.json` config file (see
  https://github.com/unicode-org/icu/blob/master/docs/userguide/icu_data/buildtool.md
  for instructions)


## jpeg-compressor

- Upstream: https://github.com/richgel999/jpeg-compressor
- Version: 2.00 (aeb7d3b463aa8228b87a28013c15ee50a7e6fcf3, 2020)
- License: Public domain or MIT

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `jpgd*.{c,h}`


## libogg

- Upstream: https://www.xiph.org/ogg
- Version: git (c8fca6b4a02d695b1ceea39b330d4406001c03ed, 2019)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `src/*.{c,h}`
- `include/ogg/*.h` in ogg/
- COPYING


## libpng

- Upstream: http://libpng.org/pub/png/libpng.html
- Version: 1.6.37 (a40189cf881e9f0db80511c382292a5604c3c3d1, 2019)
- License: libpng/zlib

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .c and .h files of the main directory, except from
  `example.c` and `pngtest.c`
- the arm/ folder
- `scripts/pnglibconf.h.prebuilt` as `pnglibconf.h`
- `LICENSE`


## libsimplewebm

- Upstream: https://github.com/zaps166/libsimplewebm
- Version: git (fe57fd3cfe6c0af4c6af110b1f84a90cf191d943, 2019)
- License: MIT (main), BSD-3-Clause (libwebm)

This contains libwebm, but the version in use is updated from the one used by libsimplewebm,
and may have *unmarked* alterations from that.

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all the .cpp, .hpp files in the main folder except `example.cpp`
- LICENSE

Important: Some files have Godot-made changes.
They are marked with `// -- GODOT start --` and `// -- GODOT end --`
comments.


## libtheora

- Upstream: https://www.theora.org
- Version: 1.1.1 (2010)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .c, .h in lib/
- all .h files in include/theora/ as theora/
- COPYING and LICENSE

Upstream patches included in the `patches` directory have been applied
on top of the 1.1.1 source (not included in any stable release yet).


## libvorbis

- Upstream: https://www.xiph.org/vorbis
- Version: 1.3.6 (2018)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `src/*` except from: `lookups.pl`, `Makefile.*`
- `include/vorbis/*.h` as vorbis/
- COPYING


## libvpx

- Upstream: https://chromium.googlesource.com/webm/libvpx/
- Version: 1.6.0 (2016)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

TODO.

Important: File `libvpx/vpx_dsp/x86/vpx_subpixel_8t_intrin_avx2.c` has
Godot-made change marked with `// -- GODOT --` comments.

The files `libvpx/third_party/android/cpu-features.{c,h}` were copied
from the Android NDK r18.


## libwebp

- Upstream: https://chromium.googlesource.com/webm/libwebp/
- Version: 1.1.0 (d7844e9762b61c9638c263657bd49e1690184832, 2020)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `src/*` except from: .am, .rc and .in files
- AUTHORS, COPYING, PATENTS

Important: The files `utils/bit_reader_utils.{c,h}` have Godot-made
changes to ensure they build for Javascript/HTML5. Those
changes are marked with `// -- GODOT --` comments.


## mbedtls

- Upstream: https://tls.mbed.org/
- Version: 2.16.10 (d61fa61bef06b64132e3490543c81b8ee40fbee3, 2021)
- License: Apache 2.0

File extracted from upstream release tarball:

- All `*.h` from `include/mbedtls/` to `thirdparty/mbedtls/include/mbedtls/`
- All `*.c` from `library/` to `thirdparty/mbedtls/library/`
- LICENSE and apache-2.0.txt files
- Applied the patch in `thirdparty/mbedtls/patches/1453.diff` (PR 1453).
  Soon to be merged upstream. Check it out at next update.
- Applied the patch in `thirdparty/mbedtls/patches/padlock.diff`. This disables
  VIA padlock support which defines a symbol `unsupported` which clashes with
  a pre-defined symbol.
- Added 2 files `godot_core_mbedtls_platform.{c,h}` providing configuration
  for light bundling with core.


## meshoptimizer

- Upstream: https://github.com/zeux/meshoptimizer
- Version: git (e3f53f66e7a35b9b8764bee478589d79e34fa698, 2021)
- License: MIT

Files extracted from upstream repository:

- All files in `src/`.
- `LICENSE.md`.


## miniupnpc

- Upstream: https://github.com/miniupnp/miniupnp
- Version: 2.2.2 (81029a860baf1f727903e5b85307903b3f40cbc8, 2021)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- All `*.c` and `*.h` files from `miniupnpc` to `thirdparty/miniupnpc/miniupnpc`
- Remove the following test or sample files:
  `listdevices.c minihttptestserver.c miniupnpcmodule.c upnpc.c upnperrors.* test* wingenminiupnpcstrings.c`
- `LICENSE`

The only modified file is `miniupnpcstrings.h`, which was created for Godot
(it is usually autogenerated by cmake). Bump the version number for miniupnpc in that
file when upgrading.


## minizip

- Upstream: http://www.zlib.net
- Version: 1.2.11 (zlib contrib, 2017)
- License: zlib

Files extracted from the upstream source:

- contrib/minizip/{crypt.h,ioapi.{c,h},zip.{c,h},unzip.{c,h}}

Important: Some files have Godot-made changes for use in core/io.
They are marked with `/* GODOT start */` and `/* GODOT end */`
comments and a patch is provided in the minizip/ folder.


## misc

Collection of single-file libraries used in Godot components.

- `clipper.{cpp,hpp}`
  * Upstream: https://sourceforge.net/projects/polyclipping
  * Version: 6.4.2 (2017) + Godot changes (added optional exceptions handling)
  * License: BSL-1.0
- `cubemap_coeffs.h`
  * Upstream: https://research.activision.com/publications/archives/fast-filtering-of-reflection-probes
    File coeffs_const_8.txt (retrieved April 2020)
  * License: MIT
- `easing_equations.cpp`
  * Upstream: http://robertpenner.com/easing/ via https://github.com/jesusgollonet/ofpennereasing (modified to fit Godot types)
  * Version: git (af72c147c3a74e7e872aa28c7e2abfcced04fdce, 2008) + Godot types and style changes
  * License: BSD-3-Clause
- `fastlz.{c,h}`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/ariya/FastLZ
  * Version: 0.5.0 (4f20f54d46f5a6dd4fae4def134933369b7602d2, 2020)
  * License: MIT
- `hq2x.{cpp,h}`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/brunexgeek/hqx
  * Version: TBD, file structure differs
  * License: Apache 2.0
- `ifaddrs-android.{cc,h}`
  * Upstream: https://chromium.googlesource.com/external/webrtc/stable/talk/+/master/base/ifaddrs-android.h
  * Version: git (5976650443d68ccfadf1dea24999ee459dd2819d, 2013)
  * License: BSD-3-Clause
- `mikktspace.{c,h}`
  * Upstream: https://archive.blender.org/wiki/index.php/Dev:Shading/Tangent_Space_Normal_Maps/
  * Version: 1.0 (2011)
  * License: zlib
- `open-simplex-noise.{c,h}`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/smcameron/open-simplex-noise-in-c
  * Version: git (826f1dd1724e6fb3ff45f58e48c0fbae864c3403, 2020) + custom changes
  * License: Public Domain or Unlicense
- `pcg.{cpp,h}`
  * Upstream: http://www.pcg-random.org
  * Version: minimal C implementation, http://www.pcg-random.org/download.html
  * License: Apache 2.0
- `polypartition.{cpp,h}`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/ivanfratric/polypartition (`src/polypartition.{cpp,h}`)
  * Version: git (7bdffb428b2b19ad1c43aa44c714dcc104177e84, 2021)
  * Modifications: Change from STL to Godot types (see provided patch).
  * License: MIT
- `r128.h`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/fahickman/r128
  * Version: 1.4.4 (cf2e88fc3e7d7dfe99189686f914874cd0bda15e, 2020)
  * License: Public Domain or Unlicense
- `smaz.{c,h}`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/antirez/smaz
  * Version: git (2f625846a775501fb69456567409a8b12f10ea25, 2012)
  * License: BSD-3-Clause
  * Modifications: use `const char*` instead of `char*` for input string
- `stb_rect_pack.h`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/nothings/stb
  * Version: 1.00 (2bb4a0accd4003c1db4c24533981e01b1adfd656, 2019)
  * License: Public Domain or Unlicense or MIT
- `stb_vorbis.c`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/nothings/stb
  * Version: 1.20 (314d0a6f9af5af27e585336eecea333e95c5a2d8, 2020)
  * License: Public Domain or Unlicense or MIT
- `yuv2rgb.h`
  * Upstream: http://wss.co.uk/pinknoise/yuv2rgb/ (to check)
  * Version: ?
  * License: BSD


## nanosvg

- Upstream: https://github.com/memononen/nanosvg
- Version: git (3e403ec72a9145cbbcc6c63d94a4caf079aafec2, 2020)
- License: zlib

Files extracted from the upstream source:

- All .h files in `src/`
- LICENSE.txt


## oidn

- Upstream: https://github.com/OpenImageDenoise/oidn
- Version: 1.1.0 (c58c5216db05ceef4cde5a096862f2eeffd14c06, 2019)
- License: Apache 2.0

Files extracted from upstream source:

- common/* (except tasking.* and CMakeLists.txt)
- core/*
- include/OpenImageDenoise/* (except version.h.in)
- LICENSE.txt
- mkl-dnn/include/*
- mkl-dnn/src/* (except CMakeLists.txt)
- weights/rtlightmap_hdr.tza
- scripts/resource_to_cpp.py

Modified files:
Modifications are marked with `// -- GODOT start --` and `// -- GODOT end --`.
Patch files are provided in `oidn/patches/`.

- core/autoencoder.cpp
- core/autoencoder.h
- core/common.h
- core/device.cpp
- core/device.h
- core/transfer_function.cpp

- scripts/resource_to_cpp.py (used in modules/denoise/resource_to_cpp.py)


## opus

- Upstream: https://opus-codec.org
- Version: 1.1.5 (opus) and 0.8 (opusfile) (2017)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .c and .h files in src/ (both opus and opusfile)
- all .h files in include/ (both opus and opusfile) as opus/
- remove unused `opus_demo.c`,
- remove `http.c`, `wincerts.c` and `winerrno.h` (part of
  unused libopusurl)
- celt/ and silk/ subfolders
- COPYING


## pcre2

- Upstream: http://www.pcre.org
- Version: 10.36 (r1288, 2020)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- Files listed in the file NON-AUTOTOOLS-BUILD steps 1-4
- All .h files in src/ apart from pcre2posix.h
- src/pcre2_jit_match.c
- src/pcre2_jit_misc.c
- src/sljit/
- AUTHORS and LICENCE


## pvrtccompressor

- Upstream: https://bitbucket.org/jthlim/pvrtccompressor (dead link)
  Unofficial backup fork: https://github.com/LibreGamesArchive/PVRTCCompressor
- Version: hg (cf7177748ee0dcdccfe89716dc11a47d2dc81af5, 2015)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .cpp and .h files apart from `main.cpp`
- LICENSE.TXT


## recastnavigation

- Upstream: https://github.com/recastnavigation/recastnavigation
- Version: git (57610fa6ef31b39020231906f8c5d40eaa8294ae, 2019)
- License: zlib

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `Recast/` folder without `CMakeLists.txt`
- License.txt


## rvo2

- Upstream: https://github.com/snape/RVO2-3D
- Version: 1.0.1 (e3883f288a9e55ecfed3633a01af3e12778c6acf, 2016)
- License: Apache 2.0

Files extracted from upstream source:

- All .cpp and .h files in the `src/` folder except for RVO.h, RVOSimulator.cpp and RVOSimulator.h
- LICENSE

Important: Some files have Godot-made changes; so to enrich the features
originally proposed by this library and better integrate this library with
Godot. Please check the file to know what's new.


## spirv-reflect

- Upstream: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Reflect
- Version: git (c0ce03a43ca77fedb5abfd1976ae2fd0eeb0e611, 2021)
- License: Apache 2.0

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `spirv_reflect.{c,h}`
- `include` folder
- `LICENSE`


## squish

- Upstream: https://sourceforge.net/projects/libsquish
- Version: 1.15 (r104, 2017)
- License: MIT

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .cpp, .h and .inl files

Important: Some files have Godot-made changes.
They are marked with `// -- GODOT start --` and `// -- GODOT end --`
comments and a patch is provided in the squish/ folder.


## tinyexr

- Upstream: https://github.com/syoyo/tinyexr
- Version: 1.0.0 (e4b7840d9448b7d57a88384ce26143004f3c0c71, 2020)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `tinyexr.{cc,h}`


## vhacd

- Upstream: https://github.com/kmammou/v-hacd
- Version: git (b07958e18e01d504e3af80eeaeb9f033226533d7, 2019)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- From `src/VHACD_Lib/`: `inc`, `public` and `src`
- `LICENSE`

Some downstream changes have been made and are identified by
`// -- GODOT start --` and `// -- GODOT end --` comments.
They can be reapplied using the patches included in the `vhacd`
folder.


## vulkan

- Upstream: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Loader
- Version: sdk-1.2.162.0 (7a313093b5c4af964d50a5a64e73d7df6152ea3f, 2020)
- License: Apache 2.0

Unless there is a specific reason to package a more recent version, please stick
to Vulkan SDK releases (prefixed by `sdk-`) for all components.

NOTE: Use `scripts/update_deps.py --ref <version>` in the Loader git repository
to retrieve the `Vulkan-Headers` repository matching the loader version.

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `Vulkan-Headers/include/` as `include/`
- All `.c` and `.h` files in `loader/` and `loader/generated/`, put in a common
  `loader/` folder
- `LICENSE.txt`

`vk_enum_string_helper.h` is taken from the matching `Vulkan-ValidationLayers`
SDK release: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-ValidationLayers/blob/master/layers/generated/vk_enum_string_helper.h

`vk_mem_alloc.h` is taken from https://github.com/GPUOpen-LibrariesAndSDKs/VulkanMemoryAllocator
Version: 2.3.0 (2019)
`vk_mem_alloc.cpp` and `android/vk_mem_alloc.cpp` are Godot files and should be preserved on updates.

Patches in the `patches` directory should be re-applied after updates.


## wslay

- Upstream: https://github.com/tatsuhiro-t/wslay
- Version: 1.1.1 (c9a84aa6df8512584c77c8cd15be9536b89c35aa, 2020)
- License: MIT

File extracted from upstream release tarball:

- All `*.c` and `*.h` in `lib/` and `lib/includes/`
- `wslay.h` has a small Godot addition to fix MSVC build.
  See `thirdparty/wslay/msvcfix.diff`


## xatlas

- Upstream: https://github.com/jpcy/xatlas
- Version: git (5571fc7ef0d06832947c0a935ccdcf083f7a9264, 2020)
- License: MIT

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `xatlas.{cpp,h}`
- `LICENSE`


## zlib

- Upstream: http://www.zlib.net
- Version: 1.2.11 (2017)
- License: zlib

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .c and .h files


## zstd

- Upstream: https://github.com/facebook/zstd
- Version: 1.4.8 (97a3da1df009d4dc67251de0c4b1c9d7fe286fc1, 2020)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- lib/{common/,compress/,decompress/,zstd.h}
- LICENSE

Commit message:

[Net] Fix miniupnpc UWP build.
The patch has already been upstreamed, and custom patching won't be
needed during next version update.

thirdparty/README.md, after:

# Third party libraries

Please keep categories (`##` level) listed alphabetically and matching their
respective folder names. Use two empty lines to separate categories for
readability.


## basis_universal

- Upstream: https://github.com/BinomialLLC/basis_universal
- Version: git (895ee8ee7e04f22267f8d16d46de04d5a01d63ac, 2020)
- License: Apache 2.0

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `.cpp` and `.h` files in root folder except for `basisu_tool.cpp` (contains `main` and can cause link error)
- `.cpp`, `.h` and `.inc` files in `transcoder/`, keeping folder structure
- `LICENSE`


## bullet

- Upstream: https://github.com/bulletphysics/bullet3
- Version: 3.08 (df09fd9ed37e365ceae884ca7f620b61607dae2e, 2020)
- License: zlib

Files extracted from upstream source:

- src/* apart from CMakeLists.txt and premake4.lua files
- LICENSE.txt


## certs

- Upstream: Mozilla, via https://apps.fedoraproject.org/packages/ca-certificates
- Version: 2018.2.26 (2018)
- License: MPL 2.0

File extracted from a recent Fedora install:
/etc/pki/ca-trust/extracted/pem/tls-ca-bundle.pem
(It can't be extracted directly from the package,
as it's generated on the user's system.)


## cvtt

- Upstream: https://github.com/elasota/cvtt
- Version: 1.0.0-beta4 (cc8472a04ba110fe999c686d07af40f7839051fd, 2018)
- License: MIT

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .cpp, .h, and .txt files in ConvectionKernels/


## doctest

- Upstream: https://github.com/onqtam/doctest
- Version: 2.4.4 (97d5a9447e66cd5e107b7a6c463be4a468a40496, 2020)
- License: MIT

Extracted from .zip provided. Extracted license and header only.


## enet

- Upstream: http://enet.bespin.org
- Version: 1.3.17 (e0e7045b7e056b454b5093cb34df49dc4cee0bee, 2020)
- License: MIT

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .c files in the main directory (except unix.c win32.c)
- the include/enet/ folder as enet/ (except unix.h win32.h)
- LICENSE file

Important: enet.h, host.c, protocol.c have been slightly modified
to be usable by Godot's socket implementation and allow IPv6 and DTLS.
Apply the patches in the `patches/` folder when syncing on newer upstream
commits.

Three files (godot.cpp, enet/godot.h, enet/godot_ext.h) have been added to provide
enet socket implementation using Godot classes.

It is still possible to build against a system wide ENet but doing so
will limit its functionality to IPv4 only.


## etc2comp

- Upstream: https://github.com/google/etc2comp
- Version: git (9cd0f9cae0f32338943699bb418107db61bb66f2, 2017)
- License: Apache 2.0

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .cpp and .h files in EtcLib/
- README.md, LICENSE, AUTHORS

Important: Some files have Godot-made changes.
They are marked with `// -- GODOT start --` and `// -- GODOT end --`
comments.


## fonts

- `NotoSans*.ttf`, `NotoNaskhArabicUI_Regular.ttf`:
  * Upstream: https://github.com/googlei18n/noto-fonts
  * Version: 1.06 (2017)
  * License: OFL-1.1
  * Comment: Use UI font variant if available, because it has tight vertical metrics and
    good for UI.
- `Hack_Regular.ttf`:
  * Upstream: https://github.com/source-foundry/Hack
  * Version: 3.003 (2018)
  * License: MIT + Bitstream Vera License
- `DroidSans*.ttf`:
  * Upstream: https://android.googlesource.com/platform/frameworks/base/+/master/data/fonts/
  * Version: ? (pre-2014 commit when DroidSansJapanese.ttf was obsoleted)
  * License: Apache 2.0
- `Tamsyn*.png`:
  * Upstream: http://www.fial.com/~scott/tamsyn-font/
  * Version: 1.11 (2015)
  * License: Tamsyn
  * Comment: Extracted "0..9,A..F" characters for hex code printing.


## freetype

- Upstream: https://www.freetype.org
- Version: 2.10.4 (6a2b3e4007e794bfc6c91030d0ed987f925164a8, 2020)
- License: FreeType License (BSD-like)

Files extracted from upstream source:

- the `src/` folder, stripped of the `Jamfile` files and the `tools` subfolder
- the `include/` folder
- `docs/{FTL.TXT,LICENSE.TXT}`


## glslang

- Upstream: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/glslang
- Version: git (dd69df7f3dac26362e10b0f38efb9e47990f7537, 2020)
- License: glslang

Version should be kept in sync with the one of the used Vulkan SDK (see `vulkan`
section). Check Vulkan-ValidationLayers at the matching SDK tag for the known
good glslang commit: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-ValidationLayers/blob/master/scripts/known_good.json

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `glslang` (except `glslang/HLSL`), `OGLCompilersDLL`, `SPIRV`
- `StandAlone/{DirStackFileIncluder.h,ResourceLimits.{cpp,h}}`
- Run `cmake . && make` and copy generated `include/glslang/build_info.h`
  to `glslang/build_info.h`
- `LICENSE.txt`
- Unnecessary files like `CMakeLists.txt` and `updateGrammar` removed.


## graphite

- Upstream: https://github.com/silnrsi/graphite
- Version: 1.3.14 (92f59dcc52f73ce747f1cdc831579ed2546884aa, 2020)
- License: MPL-2.0

Files extracted from upstream source:

- the `include` folder
- the `src` folder
- `COPYING`, `ChangeLog`


## harfbuzz

- Upstream: https://github.com/harfbuzz/harfbuzz
- Version: 2.8.0 (03538e872a0610a65fad692b33d3646f387cf578, 2021)
- License: MIT

Files extracted from upstream source:

- the `src` folder
- `AUTHORS`, `COPYING`, `NEWS`, `THANKS`


## icu4c

- Upstream: https://github.com/unicode-org/icu
- Version: 68.2 (84e1f26ea77152936e70d53178a816dbfbf69989, 2020)
- License: Unicode

Files extracted from upstream source:

- the `common` folder
- `APIChangeReport.md`, `LICENSE`

Files generated from upstream source:

- the `icudt68l.dat` built with the provided `godot_data.json` config file (see
  https://github.com/unicode-org/icu/blob/master/docs/userguide/icu_data/buildtool.md
  for instructions)


## jpeg-compressor

- Upstream: https://github.com/richgel999/jpeg-compressor
- Version: 2.00 (aeb7d3b463aa8228b87a28013c15ee50a7e6fcf3, 2020)
- License: Public domain or MIT

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `jpgd*.{c,h}`


## libogg

- Upstream: https://www.xiph.org/ogg
- Version: git (c8fca6b4a02d695b1ceea39b330d4406001c03ed, 2019)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `src/*.{c,h}`
- `include/ogg/*.h` in ogg/
- COPYING


## libpng

- Upstream: http://libpng.org/pub/png/libpng.html
- Version: 1.6.37 (a40189cf881e9f0db80511c382292a5604c3c3d1, 2019)
- License: libpng/zlib

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .c and .h files of the main directory, except from
  `example.c` and `pngtest.c`
- the arm/ folder
- `scripts/pnglibconf.h.prebuilt` as `pnglibconf.h`
- `LICENSE`


## libsimplewebm

- Upstream: https://github.com/zaps166/libsimplewebm
- Version: git (fe57fd3cfe6c0af4c6af110b1f84a90cf191d943, 2019)
- License: MIT (main), BSD-3-Clause (libwebm)

This contains libwebm, but the version in use is updated from the one used by libsimplewebm,
and may have *unmarked* alterations from that.

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all the .cpp, .hpp files in the main folder except `example.cpp`
- LICENSE

Important: Some files have Godot-made changes.
They are marked with `// -- GODOT start --` and `// -- GODOT end --`
comments.


## libtheora

- Upstream: https://www.theora.org
- Version: 1.1.1 (2010)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .c, .h in lib/
- all .h files in include/theora/ as theora/
- COPYING and LICENSE

Upstream patches included in the `patches` directory have been applied
on top of the 1.1.1 source (not included in any stable release yet).


## libvorbis

- Upstream: https://www.xiph.org/vorbis
- Version: 1.3.6 (2018)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `src/*` except from: `lookups.pl`, `Makefile.*`
- `include/vorbis/*.h` as vorbis/
- COPYING


## libvpx

- Upstream: https://chromium.googlesource.com/webm/libvpx/
- Version: 1.6.0 (2016)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

TODO.

Important: File `libvpx/vpx_dsp/x86/vpx_subpixel_8t_intrin_avx2.c` has
Godot-made change marked with `// -- GODOT --` comments.

The files `libvpx/third_party/android/cpu-features.{c,h}` were copied
from the Android NDK r18.


## libwebp

- Upstream: https://chromium.googlesource.com/webm/libwebp/
- Version: 1.1.0 (d7844e9762b61c9638c263657bd49e1690184832, 2020)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `src/*` except from: .am, .rc and .in files
- AUTHORS, COPYING, PATENTS

Important: The files `utils/bit_reader_utils.{c,h}` have Godot-made
changes to ensure they build for Javascript/HTML5. Those
changes are marked with `// -- GODOT --` comments.


## mbedtls

- Upstream: https://tls.mbed.org/
- Version: 2.16.10 (d61fa61bef06b64132e3490543c81b8ee40fbee3, 2021)
- License: Apache 2.0

File extracted from upstream release tarball:

- All `*.h` from `include/mbedtls/` to `thirdparty/mbedtls/include/mbedtls/`
- All `*.c` from `library/` to `thirdparty/mbedtls/library/`
- LICENSE and apache-2.0.txt files
- Applied the patch in `thirdparty/mbedtls/patches/1453.diff` (PR 1453).
  Soon to be merged upstream. Check it out at next update.
- Applied the patch in `thirdparty/mbedtls/patches/padlock.diff`. This disables
  VIA padlock support which defines a symbol `unsupported` which clashes with
  a pre-defined symbol.
- Added 2 files `godot_core_mbedtls_platform.{c,h}` providing configuration
  for light bundling with core.


## meshoptimizer

- Upstream: https://github.com/zeux/meshoptimizer
- Version: git (e3f53f66e7a35b9b8764bee478589d79e34fa698, 2021)
- License: MIT

Files extracted from upstream repository:

- All files in `src/`.
- `LICENSE.md`.


## miniupnpc

- Upstream: https://github.com/miniupnp/miniupnp
- Version: 2.2.2 (81029a860baf1f727903e5b85307903b3f40cbc8, 2021)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- All `*.c` and `*.h` files from `miniupnpc` to `thirdparty/miniupnpc/miniupnpc`
- Remove the following test or sample files:
  `listdevices.c minihttptestserver.c miniupnpcmodule.c upnpc.c upnperrors.* test* wingenminiupnpcstrings.c`
- `LICENSE`

The only modified file is `miniupnpcstrings.h`, which was created for Godot
(it is usually autogenerated by cmake). Bump the version number for miniupnpc in that
file when upgrading.

Note: The following upstream patch has been applied, remove this notice on next update.
https://github.com/miniupnp/miniupnp/commit/3a08dd4b89af2e9effa22a136bac86f2f306fd79


## minizip

- Upstream: http://www.zlib.net
- Version: 1.2.11 (zlib contrib, 2017)
- License: zlib

Files extracted from the upstream source:

- contrib/minizip/{crypt.h,ioapi.{c,h},zip.{c,h},unzip.{c,h}}

Important: Some files have Godot-made changes for use in core/io.
They are marked with `/* GODOT start */` and `/* GODOT end */`
comments and a patch is provided in the minizip/ folder.


## misc

Collection of single-file libraries used in Godot components.

- `clipper.{cpp,hpp}`
  * Upstream: https://sourceforge.net/projects/polyclipping
  * Version: 6.4.2 (2017) + Godot changes (added optional exceptions handling)
  * License: BSL-1.0
- `cubemap_coeffs.h`
  * Upstream: https://research.activision.com/publications/archives/fast-filtering-of-reflection-probes
    File coeffs_const_8.txt (retrieved April 2020)
  * License: MIT
- `easing_equations.cpp`
  * Upstream: http://robertpenner.com/easing/ via https://github.com/jesusgollonet/ofpennereasing (modified to fit Godot types)
  * Version: git (af72c147c3a74e7e872aa28c7e2abfcced04fdce, 2008) + Godot types and style changes
  * License: BSD-3-Clause
- `fastlz.{c,h}`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/ariya/FastLZ
  * Version: 0.5.0 (4f20f54d46f5a6dd4fae4def134933369b7602d2, 2020)
  * License: MIT
- `hq2x.{cpp,h}`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/brunexgeek/hqx
  * Version: TBD, file structure differs
  * License: Apache 2.0
- `ifaddrs-android.{cc,h}`
  * Upstream: https://chromium.googlesource.com/external/webrtc/stable/talk/+/master/base/ifaddrs-android.h
  * Version: git (5976650443d68ccfadf1dea24999ee459dd2819d, 2013)
  * License: BSD-3-Clause
- `mikktspace.{c,h}`
  * Upstream: https://archive.blender.org/wiki/index.php/Dev:Shading/Tangent_Space_Normal_Maps/
  * Version: 1.0 (2011)
  * License: zlib
- `open-simplex-noise.{c,h}`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/smcameron/open-simplex-noise-in-c
  * Version: git (826f1dd1724e6fb3ff45f58e48c0fbae864c3403, 2020) + custom changes
  * License: Public Domain or Unlicense
- `pcg.{cpp,h}`
  * Upstream: http://www.pcg-random.org
  * Version: minimal C implementation, http://www.pcg-random.org/download.html
  * License: Apache 2.0
- `polypartition.{cpp,h}`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/ivanfratric/polypartition (`src/polypartition.{cpp,h}`)
  * Version: git (7bdffb428b2b19ad1c43aa44c714dcc104177e84, 2021)
  * Modifications: Change from STL to Godot types (see provided patch).
  * License: MIT
- `r128.h`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/fahickman/r128
  * Version: 1.4.4 (cf2e88fc3e7d7dfe99189686f914874cd0bda15e, 2020)
  * License: Public Domain or Unlicense
- `smaz.{c,h}`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/antirez/smaz
  * Version: git (2f625846a775501fb69456567409a8b12f10ea25, 2012)
  * License: BSD-3-Clause
  * Modifications: use `const char*` instead of `char*` for input string
- `stb_rect_pack.h`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/nothings/stb
  * Version: 1.00 (2bb4a0accd4003c1db4c24533981e01b1adfd656, 2019)
  * License: Public Domain or Unlicense or MIT
- `stb_vorbis.c`
  * Upstream: https://github.com/nothings/stb
  * Version: 1.20 (314d0a6f9af5af27e585336eecea333e95c5a2d8, 2020)
  * License: Public Domain or Unlicense or MIT
- `yuv2rgb.h`
  * Upstream: http://wss.co.uk/pinknoise/yuv2rgb/ (to check)
  * Version: ?
  * License: BSD


## nanosvg

- Upstream: https://github.com/memononen/nanosvg
- Version: git (3e403ec72a9145cbbcc6c63d94a4caf079aafec2, 2020)
- License: zlib

Files extracted from the upstream source:

- All .h files in `src/`
- LICENSE.txt


## oidn

- Upstream: https://github.com/OpenImageDenoise/oidn
- Version: 1.1.0 (c58c5216db05ceef4cde5a096862f2eeffd14c06, 2019)
- License: Apache 2.0

Files extracted from upstream source:

- common/* (except tasking.* and CMakeLists.txt)
- core/*
- include/OpenImageDenoise/* (except version.h.in)
- LICENSE.txt
- mkl-dnn/include/*
- mkl-dnn/src/* (except CMakeLists.txt)
- weights/rtlightmap_hdr.tza
- scripts/resource_to_cpp.py

Modified files:
Modifications are marked with `// -- GODOT start --` and `// -- GODOT end --`.
Patch files are provided in `oidn/patches/`.

- core/autoencoder.cpp
- core/autoencoder.h
- core/common.h
- core/device.cpp
- core/device.h
- core/transfer_function.cpp

- scripts/resource_to_cpp.py (used in modules/denoise/resource_to_cpp.py)


## opus

- Upstream: https://opus-codec.org
- Version: 1.1.5 (opus) and 0.8 (opusfile) (2017)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .c and .h files in src/ (both opus and opusfile)
- all .h files in include/ (both opus and opusfile) as opus/
- remove unused `opus_demo.c`,
- remove `http.c`, `wincerts.c` and `winerrno.h` (part of
  unused libopusurl)
- celt/ and silk/ subfolders
- COPYING


## pcre2

- Upstream: http://www.pcre.org
- Version: 10.36 (r1288, 2020)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- Files listed in the file NON-AUTOTOOLS-BUILD steps 1-4
- All .h files in src/ apart from pcre2posix.h
- src/pcre2_jit_match.c
- src/pcre2_jit_misc.c
- src/sljit/
- AUTHORS and LICENCE


## pvrtccompressor

- Upstream: https://bitbucket.org/jthlim/pvrtccompressor (dead link)
  Unofficial backup fork: https://github.com/LibreGamesArchive/PVRTCCompressor
- Version: hg (cf7177748ee0dcdccfe89716dc11a47d2dc81af5, 2015)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .cpp and .h files apart from `main.cpp`
- LICENSE.TXT


## recastnavigation

- Upstream: https://github.com/recastnavigation/recastnavigation
- Version: git (57610fa6ef31b39020231906f8c5d40eaa8294ae, 2019)
- License: zlib

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `Recast/` folder without `CMakeLists.txt`
- License.txt


## rvo2

- Upstream: https://github.com/snape/RVO2-3D
- Version: 1.0.1 (e3883f288a9e55ecfed3633a01af3e12778c6acf, 2016)
- License: Apache 2.0

Files extracted from upstream source:

- All .cpp and .h files in the `src/` folder except for RVO.h, RVOSimulator.cpp and RVOSimulator.h
- LICENSE

Important: Some files have Godot-made changes; so to enrich the features
originally proposed by this library and better integrate this library with
Godot. Please check the file to know what's new.


## spirv-reflect

- Upstream: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/SPIRV-Reflect
- Version: git (c0ce03a43ca77fedb5abfd1976ae2fd0eeb0e611, 2021)
- License: Apache 2.0

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `spirv_reflect.{c,h}`
- `include` folder
- `LICENSE`


## squish

- Upstream: https://sourceforge.net/projects/libsquish
- Version: 1.15 (r104, 2017)
- License: MIT

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .cpp, .h and .inl files

Important: Some files have Godot-made changes.
They are marked with `// -- GODOT start --` and `// -- GODOT end --`
comments and a patch is provided in the squish/ folder.


## tinyexr

- Upstream: https://github.com/syoyo/tinyexr
- Version: 1.0.0 (e4b7840d9448b7d57a88384ce26143004f3c0c71, 2020)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `tinyexr.{cc,h}`


## vhacd

- Upstream: https://github.com/kmammou/v-hacd
- Version: git (b07958e18e01d504e3af80eeaeb9f033226533d7, 2019)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- From `src/VHACD_Lib/`: `inc`, `public` and `src`
- `LICENSE`

Some downstream changes have been made and are identified by
`// -- GODOT start --` and `// -- GODOT end --` comments.
They can be reapplied using the patches included in the `vhacd`
folder.


## vulkan

- Upstream: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-Loader
- Version: sdk-1.2.162.0 (7a313093b5c4af964d50a5a64e73d7df6152ea3f, 2020)
- License: Apache 2.0

Unless there is a specific reason to package a more recent version, please stick
to Vulkan SDK releases (prefixed by `sdk-`) for all components.

NOTE: Use `scripts/update_deps.py --ref <version>` in the Loader git repository
to retrieve the `Vulkan-Headers` repository matching the loader version.

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `Vulkan-Headers/include/` as `include/`
- All `.c` and `.h` files in `loader/` and `loader/generated/`, put in a common
  `loader/` folder
- `LICENSE.txt`

`vk_enum_string_helper.h` is taken from the matching `Vulkan-ValidationLayers`
SDK release: https://github.com/KhronosGroup/Vulkan-ValidationLayers/blob/master/layers/generated/vk_enum_string_helper.h

`vk_mem_alloc.h` is taken from https://github.com/GPUOpen-LibrariesAndSDKs/VulkanMemoryAllocator
Version: 2.3.0 (2019)
`vk_mem_alloc.cpp` and `android/vk_mem_alloc.cpp` are Godot files and should be preserved on updates.

Patches in the `patches` directory should be re-applied after updates.


## wslay

- Upstream: https://github.com/tatsuhiro-t/wslay
- Version: 1.1.1 (c9a84aa6df8512584c77c8cd15be9536b89c35aa, 2020)
- License: MIT

File extracted from upstream release tarball:

- All `*.c` and `*.h` in `lib/` and `lib/includes/`
- `wslay.h` has a small Godot addition to fix MSVC build.
  See `thirdparty/wslay/msvcfix.diff`


## xatlas

- Upstream: https://github.com/jpcy/xatlas
- Version: git (5571fc7ef0d06832947c0a935ccdcf083f7a9264, 2020)
- License: MIT

Files extracted from upstream source:

- `xatlas.{cpp,h}`
- `LICENSE`


## zlib

- Upstream: http://www.zlib.net
- Version: 1.2.11 (2017)
- License: zlib

Files extracted from upstream source:

- all .c and .h files


## zstd

- Upstream: https://github.com/facebook/zstd
- Version: 1.4.8 (97a3da1df009d4dc67251de0c4b1c9d7fe286fc1, 2020)
- License: BSD-3-Clause

Files extracted from upstream source:

- lib/{common/,compress/,decompress/,zstd.h}
- LICENSE
